1
-----
Many questions in science are causal in nature.

2
-----
We can take examples from various domains.

such as, in epidemiology, we could be interested in understanding if vaccination reduces the spread of infectious disease?

3
------
In social science, we might be interested in understanding whether violent video games increase aggressive behavior in children?

4
------
Or in environmental science, we might be interested in understanding whether deforestation contributes to climate change?

5
------
In all these causal questions, our primary goal is to understand how an
intervention on an exposure affects an outcome of interest. 

In the examples I showed earlier, factors like vaccination, playing video games,
and deforestation represent exposures. Our goal is to determine how changing
these exposures impacts outcomes such as the spread of infection, aggressive 
behavior, or climate change.

6
------
To answer such causal questions, we need to address two sub-questions:

Firstly, we need to establish if there is a causal link between the exposure
and the outcome. If so, we need to understand the type of relationship between
them such as whether there is a direct causation or an indirect one.

Secondly, we need to measure the impact of the intervention. For instance, if
we vaccinate a group of people, by how much does the spread of infection
decrease?

7
-------
The most effective way to answer both of these questions is through randomized
controlled trials.

For example, let's consider the example of the effect of vaccination on the spread of
infection.

In a randomized controlled trial, we begin by selecting a group of participants and
then randomly dividing them into two groups.

In one group, we give the vaccine to all the participants, while we not give the vaccine
to the second group.

We can then compare the spread of infection in these two groups.

8
-------
Randomized Controlled trials can answer both the questions we were interested in. If 
we observed a difference in infection rates between the two groups, we can
conclude that there is a causal effect of the vaccine on the spread of infection.

Additionally, we can quantify this effect by comparing the number of infections in
each group.

9
--------
While randomized controlled trials are powerful tools for answering causal
questions, they are not always feasible.

For instance, conducting a controlled trial to study the effect of smoking on lung
cancer would be unethical. We cannot ask non-smokers to start smoking.

10
---------
It can also be difficult to control the exposure. For example, when examining the 
impact of deforestation on climate change, we cannot create multiple clones of Earth.

11
---------
Cost can also be an issue. For instance, if we wanted to assess the effect of education on income, we would need to track individuals over several decades, which could be expensive.

12
---------
However, we already have lots of non-experimental data relevant to these questions. Can we somehow use that to answer our causal questions?

13
---------
The answer is yes, but it requires us to understand the causal mechanism between the exposure and the outcome variables.

One of the ways to represent these causal mechanisms is through causal diagrams as shown in the example here.

In this causal graph, I have used the example of the effect of deforestation on climate
change. The nodes represent the variables of interest, while the edges indicate the causal
relationships between these variables.

14
----------
With a causal graph like this, we can identify the causal relationships between variables by examining the paths in the graph.

For example, the direct edge between Deforestation and Climate Change indicates a direct causal relationship between the two.

15
----------
Here’s another example showing an indirect causal relationship. In this case, deforestation leads to a loss of biodiversity, which in turn contributes to climate change.

16
----------
We can also quantify these causal relationships in causal graphs by assigning values to each edge as shown in the figure. These values represent the strength of the relationship.

17
-----------
Using these graphical representations, we can address both of our key questions that we were interested in.

First, by constructing these causal graphs, we can identify and understand the causal relationships between variables. Second, we can quantify these relationships by estimating the strength of the edges in the graph.

18
------------
So, the first question is: how do we construct these causal graphs from data?

In most cases, researchers manually build these graphs using their domain knowledge. Because of this manual process, it is crucial to test whether the constructed graph accurately represents our data.

19
----------------
One of the ways to test these causal graphs is using conditional independence
tests. Each of these graphs imply a set of conditional independences as shown
in the figure. We can use statistical tests to verify whether these conditional
independences  hold in our data or not. And based on the result of this testing
we can further improve our model.

20
-------------

However, selecting the appropriate statistical test can depend on several
factors such as Type of Variable, whether the variables are continuous,
discrete, or ordinal.

The distribution of Variables, for example, whether they are distributed
normally, or have a skewed distribution.

The type of relationship between the variables, whether its linear or non-linear.

One of our contributions during my PhD was developing a comprehensive guide to help researchers select the most appropriate test based on their data type and structure.

21
---------
Another way to construct these causal graphs automatically is by somewhat
reversing the model testing approach. Instead of starting with a graph, we can
search for these conditional independences directly in the data, and use that
information to build the causal graph.

For both model testing and automated construction, it is important that our
statistical tests are accurate. Any inaccuracies in the test can lead to errors
in our resulting graph.

One of our contributions during my PhD was developing a new conditional independence test that can work on mixed data and is more accurate than previous methods.

22
----------
Once we have the causal graph, we can move on to our second key question of
estimating the strength of the edges in the graph. 

When the variables can be directly measured, such as deforestation which we can 
for example quantify in number of square kms of lost forest, we have methods
to estimate the edge strengths in that case.

However, not all variables can be measured directly. For instance, we can not
assign a single number to represent climate change. To measure such variables,
we have to rely on other proxy variables to indirectly measure them. For
example, we can use proxy variables like global average temperature, sea level
rise, and atmospheric CO2 levels to indirectly measure climate change. 

One of our contributions during my PhD was to develop methods to estimate edge strengths
when variables can not be measured directly.

23
----------
We have two main directions for future researcher.

Firstly, we want to further improve the conditional independence test that we
had proposed. We have some preliminary results showing further improvements.

Secondly, model testing and edge strength estimation are fundamentally
connected concepts. We plan to utilize that to develop an interpretable
metric for edge strength in case of mixed variables.
